

my project is multimodal emotion detection,where given a video i need to extract audio and video from it and have different models for the audio and 2 models for video where one focuses on recognising emotions from faceial expressions and other will focus on recognising emotions through body language and we have one more seoerate model which takes the physiological input and recognise emotions from that, and in the end depending on the accuracies of each model trainings the weightage or using another model for the fusion of outputs and the output should be a spectrum of emotions throughout the timeframe of the video. this is used as an assistant of a mental health care professional,this is used to recosgnise the emotions in patients who are suffering from mental health issues. i want you to search the whole internet and find me a perfect pre trained model for the audio, i want to extract the required features from the audio to recognise the emotions with high accuracy, it should be able to recognise the shivers in the voice and all sorts of signals. i also want to extract audio from the input first before feeding it to the ml model.
finally 1. i want a model trained on audio dataset i have to recognise emotions, 2.i want a script that can extract the audio from the provided video, 3.i want research on fusion and if possible ml models for fusion. and the result of the audio should also be time dependent it should say at this point of time in the audio this emotion was shows. pick the best model for this use case
my project is multimodal emotion detection,where given a video i need to extract audio and video from it and have different models for the audio and 2 models for video where one focuses on recognising emotions from faceial expressions and other will focus on recognising emotions through body language and we have one more seoerate model which takes the physiological input and recognise emotions from that, and in the end depending on the accuracies of each model trainings the weightage or using another model for the fusion of outputs and the output should be a spectrum of emotions throughout the timeframe of the video. this is used as an assistant of a mental health care professional,this is used to recosgnise the emotions in patients who are suffering from mental health issues. i want you to search the whole internet and find me a perfect pre trained model for the audio, i want to extract the required features from the audio to recognise the emotions with high accuracy, it should be able to recognise the shivers in the voice and all sorts of signals. i also want to extract audio from the input first before feeding it to the ml model. finally 1. i want a model trained on audio dataset i have to recognise emotions, 2.i want a script that can extract the audio from the provided video, 3.i want research on fusion and if possible ml models for fusion. and the result of the audio should also be time dependent it should say at this point of time in the audio this emotion was shows. pick the best model for this use case
Attention-Based Multimodal Fusion for Estimating Human Emotion in Real-World HRI trailer
Attention-Based Multimodal Fusion for Estimating Human Emotion in Real-World HRI
M3ER: Multiplicative Multimodal Emotion Recognition Using Facial, Textual, and Speech Cues - YouTube trailer
M3ER: Multiplicative Multimodal Emotion Recognition Using Facial, Textual, and Speech Cues - YouTube
MULTIMODAL EMOTION RECOGNITION - YouTube trailer
MULTIMODAL EMOTION RECOGNITION - YouTube

Here’s a comprehensive, expert guide tailored to your requirements for multimodal emotion recognition, focusing especially on the audio channel and its integration with other modalities—complete with the most effective pretrained models, a high-quality script for audio extraction, and state-of-the-art approaches for multimodal fusion.

1. Best Pretrained Audio Model for Emotion Recognition
Two of the most powerful, modern options (both support fine-tuning on your own audio emotion dataset):

A. Vesper (State-of-the-Art, Task-Adaptive)
What It Is: A compact, highly effective model designed to extract subtle emotional cues, such as shivers, tremors, and nuanced prosody from speech audio. It is based on WavLM but optimized with emotion-guided masking and hierarchical self-supervision for superior emotion sensitivity.

Performance: Outperforms large generic speech models even at reduced size, and is robust on leading datasets (IEMOCAP, MELD, CREMA-D).

Fine-tuning: Can be directly fine-tuned with your own labeled audio emotion dataset (see the repo for comprehensive fine-tuning and feature extraction scripts).

Repo: See the GitHub [HappyColor/Vesper].

B. Wav2Vec2-based Emotion Recognition ([ehcalabres/wav2vec2-lg-xlsr-en-speech-emotion-recognition])
What It Is: A proven, widely-used baseline; this model is fine-tuned on the RAVDESS dataset for 8 emotions, achieving ~82% accuracy out-of-the-box.

Strengths: Good at prosody and robust on English, but for specialty cues (shivers/tremors), Vesper may be more sensitive.

2. Recommended Audio Feature Extraction Pipeline
openSMILE is the gold standard for extracting a wide range of relevant emotional, paralinguistic, and voice quality features (pitch, MFCC, energy, shimmer, jitter, etc.). It can help uncover micro-signals (like shivers) that may be less explicit in deep model embeddings:

openSMILE Features for Emotion Recognition:

Prosodic: pitch (F0), energy, loudness

Voice quality: jitter, shimmer, HNR (harmonics-to-noise ratio)

Spectral: MFCCs, formants

Temporal: speaking rate, pauses, duration

Pro-Tip: You can run openSMILE alongside deep models (like Vesper or Wav2Vec2); combining traditional and deep features sometimes boosts performance for subtle cues.

3. Script: Extract Audio from Video in Python
Either FFmpeg or MoviePy can be used for fast, lossless audio extraction:

With MoviePy (Python):
python
from moviepy.editor import VideoFileClip

def extract_audio_from_video(video_file, output_ext="wav"):
    filename, ext = os.path.splitext(video_file)
    clip = VideoFileClip(video_file)
    clip.audio.write_audiofile(f"{filename}.{output_ext}")

# Usage
extract_audio_from_video("session_video.mp4")
Or, with FFmpeg directly:

python
import subprocess, os

def extract_audio_ffmpeg(video_file, output_ext="wav"):
    filename, ext = os.path.splitext(video_file)
    subprocess.call([
        "ffmpeg", "-y", "-i", video_file, f"{filename}.{output_ext}"
    ])
Both allow batch extraction, and output can go straight to your downstream feature/model pipeline.

4. Time-Dependent Emotion Prediction
How to Output the Emotion Spectrum Over Time:

Segment or window your audio stream (e.g., 1s-5s overlapping windows).

Run feature extraction/prediction for each window.

Post-process into a time series or spectrum, indicating which emotion(s) were dominant at which timestamps (essential for therapist review and logs).

Models like Vesper natively support this by handling sequential/temporal data.

5. Advanced Multimodal Fusion: Best Research and Approaches
Contemporary research demonstrates several strong fusion strategies:

A. Deep Fusion with Temporal Modeling
Workflow: Extract features from each modality (audio—Vesper; facial/body—ResNet or Inception-ResNet-v2; physiology—your preferred model). Apply a temporal model (LSTM, Temporal Convolutional Network, or Transformer) to each channel to retain time context. Fuse channels with cross-modal attention, early/late concatenation, and send to a regression/classification head.

Best-Performing Model Example: A model using CNN-LSTM for audio, Inception-ResNet-v2 for video, and LSTM+Chi-square feature selection fusion, then final classification/regression via SVM (for discrete classes) or regression head (for continuous valence-arousal).

Modern best practices: Multi-scale TCNs (Temporal Convolutional Networks) with cross-modal attention.

Output: Frame-by-frame or windowed emotion predictions, supporting the spectrum-of-emotions timeline needed by clinicians.

B. Key Papers/Implementations
Deep multimodal fusion with cross-modal attention and temporal modeling (see Interactive Multimodal Fusion with Multi-Scale TCN and Cross-Attention)

LSTM/TCN fusion followed by SVM or continuous regression head

Use of openSMILE or deep models for feature-level fusion, with decision-level fusion as fallback (Chi-square, fuzzy integral, blending)

Summary Table: Core Pipeline
Function	Model/Tool (Best)	Key Features
Audio Emotion Model	Vesper	Highly emotion-specific, task-adaptive, fine-tunable
Feature Extraction	openSMILE + Deep Model	Jitter, shimmer, MFCC, prosody, deep embeddings
Audio Extraction Script	MoviePy/FFmpeg	Fast, lossless; supports all formats
Fusion Model	TCN/LSTM + Cross-Attention	Real-time, continuous spectrum over video
Output Format	Time-segmented predictions	Spectrum/series of emotions over video duration
References to Use/Implement
Vesper model: GitHub [HappyColor/Vesper]

Wav2Vec2-based SER: Hugging Face [ehcalabres/wav2vec2-lg-xlsr-en-speech-emotion-recognition]

openSMILE: [audEERING openSMILE homepage]

Audio Extraction Script: [thepythoncode.com]

Multimodal Fusion, Attention, TCNs: [Frontiers in Neurorobotics], [arXiv 2503.10523]

All these choices are justified by recent peer-reviewed results and widespread adoption in modern affective computing research. Combining these, your system will robustly recognize emotions with temporal detail—maximizing value for mental health professionals.
